welcome to topcast and to episode 103
the second of my ask me anything
episodes the last one was a lot of fun
and there were so many questions that i
couldn't get to them in the one episode
last episode were all the questions i
received almost all the questions i
received from my patreons i think there
might be a few more to tidy up today
today will be mainly questions from
twitter and a few other sources as well
these ask me anything episodes are good
for me because they're unscripted unlike
with my other episodes that go into
detail about books i've read and ideas
that i'm investigating i have to do a
bit of research and write a little bit
of a script and at least write notes and
of course do a lot of reading with these
all i'm doing is taking the questions
and then responding to them in an
unscripted way so hopefully it comes off
a little bit more natural anyway first
as sam harris likes to say in some of
his podcasts a little bit of
housekeeping this is going to be the
first of the episodes that i'm going to
release as an audio only priorities so
it's going to come out on all of the
podcast platforms first and then it will
come out on youtube and so that might be
what i'm doing going forward there will
be the odd video episode here and there
which will be much shorter than what
i've tended to do most of my regular
episodes however are going to move to
audio only that doesn't mean they're not
going to be published on youtube they
will be it's just that they won't be
very video intensive they'll just have
the minimal visuals there such that i
can upload them as a video and anyone
who listens as audio only on youtube
will still be able to do that now there
are a lot of questions today so i'm not
going to go through any more of a
lengthy introduction and instead just
dive straight in to the question so that
i can hopefully get through what is left
of them so that i can hopefully get
through all of the ones that have been
submitted to me first one from twitter
from jiten congratulations on getting to
100 he says i look forward to the next
100. by the way am i too late for an ama
how do people learn false things through
conjecture and criticism also but then
their criticism can't be any good for
example how do homeopaths learn their
craft okay so how do people learn false
things well remember
that according to a populion framework
everything that we know is false anyway
it's going to turn out false in the
final analysis what we have are
misconceptions misconceptions that are
more or less close to the truth but
never the actual truth so what we're
learning are false things so you might
very well ask how do we learn newton's
law of gravity well via this method of
conjecture and criticism so the question
can't be how do people learn false
things as if that is something different
to learning true things because all of
our knowledge contains misconceptions
and so therefore in the final analysis
as i say it's going to turn out false so
we're learning those lessons those
theories those explanations
via this method of as you say conjecture
and criticism
and that's producing false things so if
the question is how do people learn
pseudoscience how do so many people
learn these false things that the rest
of us understand what the explanations
are for why they're false okay for much
of our knowledge what we regard as our
best explanations we don't yet know why
those things are false one day we will
and we will improve on the present best
state of our knowledge but at the moment
we don't have good explanations as to
how those theories for example the
theory of quantum the quantum theory the
general theory of relativity the theory
of plate tectonics the theory of
genetics and so on and so forth all of
these great scientific theories the
theories about how world war ii
started and finished and so on and so
forth pick your good explanation one day
we're going to find out that these
theories contain misconceptions now when
it comes to homeopaths or astrologers or
pick whatever one of these
pseudosciences that you like how is it
that they learn those things well in
exactly the same way as you kind of hint
at and it's not that their criticism
can't be any good it's just that they
haven't yet learned why these things are
false presumably and so it's just a bit
of knowledge that they lack in the case
of homeopaths as i understand it what
you do is you dilute the solution more
and more and more and the more you
dilute the solution the stronger the
nostrum the treatment the medicine that
you apparently have the homeopathic
remedy the stronger the remedy becomes
the more and more it's diluted which of
course is in stark contrast to what we
know of chemistry
chemistry at work precisely the other
way the more that you dilute something
the weaker and weaker the concentration
is or the more dilute the concentration
is i should say and therefore the less
of the active ingredient is in that
thing homeopathy says that the water
has some sort of memory this violates
what we know of physics and chemistry
you know how is this memory stored
within the water why does the water only
remember the good things that were in it
and not for example all the sewage that
has ever been in it
these things are questions unanswered
and a homeopath who is sufficient or
become or comes to learn a sufficient
amount of chemistry would i suppose have
to partition their mind logically in
some way in order to deal with the
cognitive dissonance that would come
with simultaneously thinking that
homeopathy where you dilute something
more and more it becomes stronger and
chemistry where if you dilute something
more and more it becomes weaker
you would have to somehow deal with that
contradiction but whatever the case is
yes homeopaths have to learn their craft
in precisely the same way as a chemist
would learn their craft they just
wouldn't learn science alongside and
it's not that i suppose that criticism
can't be any good it's that they don't
know
the criticisms or if they've been
presented with the criticisms they don't
understand it or if they're presented
with the criticisms they might have a
financial interest in simply ignoring
the criticisms that they are receiving
or perhaps they somehow some emotional
bias that could be all of these reasons
why they might not understand or refuse
to believe the criticism when the
criticism is valid but there is only one
way to learn whether learning the best
explanations we have
or the misconceptions we have or the
complete and utter myths that we have
once understood okay jiten has a second
question and he asks persuasion still
fails when trying to persuade
creationist flat earthers anti-vaxxers
etc
when you do have good explanations how
does it fail here so this is a related
question really on the reasons why
persuasion might fail and
my understanding is my thoughts on this
would be that persuasion often fails in
these situations when
the person trying to do the persuading
has a bad way of trying to explain
things to these people not always but i
like to put the onus back on the person
doing the explaining one might wonder
why are you trying to convince this
person in the first place when we say
there exists a good explanation we kind
of mean that in the objective sense it's
out there in abstract space someone at
some point has found this good
explanation it exists whether or not
anyone believes it anymore or not if
everyone was wiped out by an asteroid
tomorrow but our books were left behind
by definition there would be no one left
to understand to appreciate for example
that we live on a
that we once lived on a spherical earth
but that knowledge would be there in
books and if an alien race came along
they would be able to pick up those
books and find out what we knew why will
persuasion fail to convince a
creationist that they're wrong you might
also consider if you're ever explaining
something something to a child why your
explanation fails then is it the fault
of the child i would say no
i would say that although you might
possess a good explanation having the
other person the child in this case try
to understand that good explanation it's
all on you it's all on you
getting that across especially if the
child is particularly interested in that
thing and if you can't get it across to
someone it suggests a couple of things
it might suggest you don't actually
understand that good explanation after
all you think you do but when you try to
put it into words you can't which is a
red flag about the extent to which you
really do understand it if you really do
understand it you should be able to put
into
more and more simple terms such that the
person can at least meet you halfway in
coming to appreciate what you think you
appreciate that's one thing another
thing is some people are just bad at
communication some people are just bad
at um trying to persuade people they're
mean about it they lack compassion they
lack empathy they lack an ability to try
and see things from the point of view of
someone who doesn't yet understand what
they understand we've all had better and
worse teachers and the worst teachers
are the ones that although they might
very well have the knowledge the way in
which they go about trying to explain
what they know is either boring or it's
just in a manner which isn't unkind uh
there can be any number of reasons why
you aren't persuaded by the teacher even
though
at some level they must have a good
explanation operating on their mind or
in their mind now in the case of people
who are in our culture committed
creationists flat earthers anti-vaxxers
this kind of thing people who embrace
pseudoscience there's a number of
reasons for that i would blame firstly
possibly the school system in turning
people off science in not presenting
science in the way in which it should be
presented as a process but rather
turning it into a body of facts which
you can't question and then people come
out of school and they begin questioning
things and they think that they've been
indoctrinated into these ways of
thinking about science this body of
facts and rightly they're skeptical
about everything they've been taught at
school because they begin to understand
that at least some of what they were
taught was wrong and once you begin to
be critical about some of what you think
you might very well be critical about
everything that you have been taught
because the way in which people who
aren't creationists aren't flat earthers
aren't any of anti-vaxxers try and
persuade these people into coming around
to their point of view is in the most
unkind ungenerous pandering patronizing
and sometimes simply insulting way
you're not going to convince a
creationist a young earth creationist
that they're wrong by yelling at them
about how stupid they are by telling
them that they're ignorant and of course
so many people these days embrace the
theories and explanations of science for
precisely the same reasons that
creationist flat earthers and
anti-vaxxers embrace the theories that
they hold as true in other words not
because they've necessarily reached it
by a truly critical process but rather
because they've memorized a body of
facts now on the side of the people who
memorize this body of facts in science
well at least they're memorizing our
best set of facts derived from our best
explanations but it doesn't mean they
really understand what they're saying
this seems to happen very commonly when
it comes to questions about climate
change how many people truly understand
the mechanism by which climate change
happens they might understand for
example there are these things called
greenhouse gases and the greenhouse
gases trap heat in the atmosphere but do
they understand how at the level of the
molecule what's precisely going on with
carbon dioxide and infrared radiation do
they really get what's going on do they
understand the explanation or are they
outsourcing most of that explanation
to the experts and if they're doing that
why are they so vociferous in their
emotional connection to this particular
theory and willing to insult their
neighbours and other community members
who disagree with them because they also
don't actually understand the theory so
we've got two people neither of whom
understand the theory on the one hand
someone that says climate change is real
but they don't really understand the
theory and on the other hand a person
who says climate change is not real it's
not really going on it's not
anthropocentric or whatever they also
don't understand climate change but
these two people are yelling insults at
one another all about a theory they
don't understand because they're both
dogmatically committed to a particular
doctrine that comports with their
worldview with their politics and so on
and so forth
so this all comes down to why persuasion
fails because people aren't i think in
many many cases genuinely trying to
persuade one another about the truth or
falsity of these particular positions
everyone has to go in with an open mind
and a critical mind in order to really
learn and i would say
not to try and get caught up in these
discussions if you're not really
interested and the other party is not
really interested in making progress on
this front there will always be people
that don't yet understand the best
explanation and that's fine you know not
everyone has to understand
everything and some people can have
misconceptions there will always be
people who have misconceptions i would
say that so long as the geophysicist
you're talking to isn't a flat earther
so long as the
gp that you're going to with respect to
getting a vaccine isn't an anti-vaxxer
you're fine it doesn't really matter and
this will be controversial but it
shouldn't even matter
if
these people occupy political positions
either if a creationist has a political
position if a flat earther happens to be
the president of the united states if
someone in the senate happens to be an
anti-vaxxer this shouldn't really matter
and the reason i think it shouldn't
matter although it probably does it
shouldn't matter because
none of those positions should be
something that the government has any
interest in really in the case of
vaccines produced recently well private
industry came up with them anyway pretty
quickly in the case of creationism or
people being committed to a particular
kind of religious mythology every again
everyone has misconceptions no one is
immune from wandering around with
misconceptions and many people want to
pick on particular kinds of
misconceptions as being especially
dangerous but if it's not directing the
day-to-day decision-making which is in
the purview of the particular government
then i'm not particularly concerned if
the president or the prime minister
happens to be a young earth creationist
i might very well be more concerned that
presidents and prime ministers do things
like print more and more money under the
misconception that this has no effect on
the average person and the amount of
money they have in their bank account
for example so misconceptions are
everywhere and persuasion should be
expected to often fail because sometimes
people are not interested either in
persuading they're just yelling at
insults at someone else or being
persuaded again they're just
dogmatically committed to a particular
position without really understanding it
next questions from ashik less questions
and more a list of things to do
number one a refutation of physicalism
okay well let's deal with that one first
well the refutation of physicalism is
simply that there really do exist
abstract things in reality and those can
have causal effects in the world i've
used lots and lots of examples there are
examples in the beginning of infinity of
this before
let's come up with one now let's say
you're playing a computer game and let's
say this particular computer game has
various levels in order to proceed from
one level to the next when you win a
particular level the screen goes green
at the end of that particular level to
tell you that you have won that
particular level otherwise it goes red
and you have to start all over again
imagine the screen turns green why does
the screen turn green physicalism would
say that you're supposed to look at the
individual pixels and trace what's going
on at the level of the individual pixel
okay for example there's electrical
energy going through the pixel and
that's causing some sort of photo
luminescence where the photons are
coming out and they happen to be a green
color and you trace that back that
sequence all the way back through the
circuitry of the computer
and from the circuitry of the computer
you end up uh going out to the
electricity supply and from the
electricity supply you go all the way
back to the to the power station where
perhaps coal is being burnt and you're
saying that this is the reason why okay
this long sequence of cause and effect
events is the reason why ultimately the
pixels on the screen turn green and
that's why the screen turns green
because all the pixels have and all the
pixels have because this is what the
electrical circuits have told them what
to do
well that's if that was the only
possible explanation and someone insists
that that's the only explanation and the
only thing therefore that exists are the
physical events then you would be a
physicalist i don't know who's really
committed to that particular style of
physicalism whether there's other kinds
of physicalism i don't know but the
refutation of that kind of physicalism
is to simply say well the screen's gone
green because that's the rule of the
game if you win the level then the
screen turns green and talking about
games to begin with a computer game is
not a physical thing it's an abstract
thing it's it's something that can be
printed onto a
cd-rom supposedly possibly or a dvd or
downloaded off a server somewhere and
then it's run through a computer and
following the rules of the game the
rules are abstractions
and performing certain actions as a
person playing the game
these things thinking through what you
need to do the thinking part again is
more abstract stuff going on the best
explanation for why the screen turns
green is not in terms of the movement of
electrons through circuits the reason
why the screen turns green
should be
at the level of i won the game and
that's what happens and so much of the
explanations that exist out there in the
human world come down to more than just
the physical events at the level of
subatomic particles and physical forces
question two is
similar along these lines
how laws of physics and mind are
abstractions so they're different
there's certainly different kinds of
abstractions and this was in my
interview with david we talked in fact
about both of these and
well in terms of mind let's deal with
mind first
it's an interesting kind of abstraction
we both admitted there
that presumably there is an algorithm
for something like a human mind we don't
know what the algorithm is
presumably you could write this
algorithm down in something like natural
language on a piece of paper multiple
pieces of paper perhaps might be a
complex algorithm and then that could be
turned into code which you could you
know put it into a particular computer
language maybe c plus and then you could
program a computer with this particular
algorithm presumably that algorithm then
would be an algorithm for
creatively generating explanations that
algorithm is not made out of physical
stuff that algorithm can be represented
in different physical substrates
represented in but not identical to
either the paper on which it's written
or the code in which it appears in the
computer but even then represented as
code in a computer or written down on a
piece of paper it's not yet mined it's
not yet mined it's not mined until it
starts to run until it starts to do
something and so that's why it's an
interesting kind of abstraction compared
to something like a
number okay the number two exists as an
abstraction and can be written down as
the numeral two that we're all familiar
with or as the set of symbols four over
two or the string of symbols something
like that ten minus eight all of these
things represent that number
two but there's no sense in which the
number two needs to run like a program
needs to run like presumably mind would
need to run in a computer in order for
the computer to have a mind in terms of
how laws of physics are abstractions
well that's very interesting the laws of
physics can't be made of matter so
because they're not made of matter that
means they have to be something other
than matter
and so that's why we say they're
abstractions and so that's one sense in
which they are abstractions they're
abstractions in a similar way to the
number two being abstractions however
they have very important causal effects
on the stuff going on in the universe
ultimately they determine everything
that goes on the universe they don't
explain everything that goes on in the
universe we've made that point before
and the interesting thing here is that
we have knowledge of the laws of physics
and our knowledge of the laws of physics
amounts to abstractions so we have
abstractions our knowledge of the laws
of physics about abstractions the
ontological actual final laws of physics
which we come to understand over time
with increasing fidelity third question
from ashik is uh your favorite chapters
from the beginning of infinity and the
fabric of reality and also from phil um
what's your favorite chapter from each
book no tires my two are shadows and
they jump to universality for what it's
worth yeah so okay well let's deal with
um the fabric of reality first and i'm
just you can hear me turning the page
perhaps
so i can go to the
contents
certainly shadows was the one that made
me
and i've said this before realized that
i was in
the presence in terms of author of
someone who was writing at a different
level to anyone else i had hear the two
because i was struggling to understand
quantum theory in chapter two was the
thing that made me feel as if i did
finally understand what was going on and
so yes i have an emotional connection to
shadows
chapter two of the fabric of reality
because it's the one which really
convinced me there's a multiverse it's
simple as that that's a realistic
conception of quantum theory and from
then on quantum theory became
not this hugely esoteric
subject it became something more like
geology and astronomy i just got it even
though other people refuse to accept and
we'll get to this and one of the final
questions refuse to accept the
multiverse
to me it's just a straightforward simple
explanation about what's going on it was
demystified so that's all done in
shadows in around 20 pages so highly
recommend reading shadows if you want to
understand quantum theory now uh my
second favorite chapter in the fabric of
reality would be as we've just been
talking about um a some a chapter about
the first time i understood really
something more about abstractions namely
chapter 10 the nature of mathematics
where
my favorite line
if not of the whole book certainly of
that chapter is
necessary truth is the subject matter of
mathematics it is not the reward we get
for doing mathematics so that's from
chapter 10 of the nature of mathematics
of the fabric of reality rather and that
appeals to me so much because
prior to reading that prior to really
understanding what was being said there
i was one of the people that david was
arguing against namely a person an
intuitionist of a kind someone who
thought that mathematics was on a
different level to every other kind of
subject it was a subject where you could
really intuit certainty where you had a
solid foundation in thinking that you
actually had the final truth you were
there you were inherently able to
understand particular truths and so
that brought me out of that particular
state of mind from then on i understood
that mathematics really depended upon
our knowledge of physics and if our
knowledge of physics said
that well matter behaves in these ways
that could cause the symbols on the page
for example to change then it might very
well be the case that what you think
you have proven with a rock-solid
mathematical proof could actually be an
error in fact error had to always be
part of the picture and so yes
chapter 10 of the fabric of reality
convinced me of that the beginning of
infinity chapter 1 the reach of
explanations is probably my favorite
chapter there now the reason for that is
although i'd read the fabric of reality
and thought i knew what it was saying
and then i subsequently read some papa
and thought i understood what he was
saying
i never really got the fact
that
at the heart of everything in science
and everywhere else is this idea of
explanations and of course there in
chapter one as david says and we'll come
to this in another chapter
he said before this is where the real
innovation happens in the fabric in the
beginning of infinity where david
explains what a good explanation is
namely an explanation that's hard to
vary while still doing the work of
explaining the phenomena uh that you're
interested in
so that would be my favorite chapter
from the beginning of infinity and then
i think um i'd have to pick chapter 12 a
physicist's history of bad philosophy
just because i'm interested in this
topic of
why don't people accept the best
understanding of quantum theory and well
it's explained there very very well okay
it's explained the bad terms in
philosophy that happened
which caused academics and professional
quantum physicists to inherit
this particular way of thinking and this
bad philosophy this chapter on bad
philosophy explains some of the things
that are going wrong even now so it's
prescient in a sense once the philosophy
goes wrong once academic philosophy
begins to go wrong a whole bunch of
other things can go wrong as well so
physics is kind of the canary in the
coal mine to some extent if physics
itself can start to be upended by bad
philosophy then certainly
politics history biology
everything else can start to be upended
by bad philosophy so
that chapter really tells you the
reasons why you need to value philosophy
it's not merely something that is
confined to
the halls of academic institutions
it is there but it leaks out and if it
goes bad there the bad stuff leaks out
everywhere next question from
tim stevenson
another question observation is theory
laden but are facts also theory laden is
a fact not a theory that is said to be
fallibly true
uh yes so uh
both of those things are
true i would say a fact is fallibly true
anything we think is a good explanation
is i would say that's what i like to say
it's fallibly true which sounds like a
bit of a cop-out
because once you start putting
qualifiers in front of true like that'll
be true what you really mean is not true
so what i mean by fallibly true is
something like well we're acting as
though it's true for now okay take it
seriously as true whilst keeping in mind
that ultimately it has to turn out false
so that's what we mean by failure be
true we just don't know
how it's false yet and if we don't know
how it's false then we can act on the
assumption that it is true and we even
do this with things we know are actually
false like newton's theory of gravity as
i keep coming back to that trope example
we know that it's false but we can act
as if it's true and solve problems using
it but tim asks um are facts also theory
laid in yes yes
a in the previous ask me anything
episode people ask me what i thought a
fact was and i said it was just an
elementary part of a particular theory i
don't think that's a strict line between
fact and theory at all i know that
people who
um oh look you know there are popular
science communicators there are even
famous scientists there are comedians
there are all sorts of people out there
who like to try and put a strict line
between facts and theory so when we talk
about the famous example that often
comes up here is the theory of evolution
and people get very vociferous and they
start you know bashing the desk and
saying but it's not a theory it's a fact
or something like the word theory and
science means something different to the
word theory anywhere else all of which
is false okay um the theory of evolution
it's both factual okay it's it's
something that is so far as we know true
at least uh neo-darwinism the most
modern versions of
evolution by natural selection that we
understand involving genetics and so on
and so forth that's factual it's a fact
in some way or a set of connected facts
it's also a theory it's an explanatory
theory and
theories are ways of explaining the
world some of which are good and some of
which are not good so the real
distinction is between good hard to vary
theories hard to vary explanations and
less good and bad
explanations of the world but yes facts
are theory late and pick a fact i mean
um the sky is blue well to me it's blue
that's theory-laden because according to
my eyes the sky appears to be blue now
we could take a a spectroscope you know
one of these devices that measures the
wavelength of the light and we could
find out the light coming from the sky
has a particular wavelength and that
wavelength corresponds to what we define
as blue light and via that chain of
reasoning we end up with a conclusion
that yes the sky is blue based on the
readings of our instruments but of
course all that depends upon the theory
about how the instrument works okay so
even if we have this global consensus
that the sky is blue it still comes down
to a theory about what blue is so it
doesn't matter what your fact is
there has to be
theory behind it an explanation as to
how you're getting to that fact in the
first place that's what the theory laid
in part is you have a theory about
how the knowledge has been generated and
that theory is
fallible and so therefore you're
reaching a conclusion that is
validly true as you say there all right
moving on a question from danny
thoughts on the mind body problem
um i don't think it's much of a problem
really um i think mind is software
running on the body the brain and that's
that
there's there's certainly an open
question about
you know as we've already talked about
so far this episode is to
what kind of program the mind is what
kind of software the mind is exactly
and how this software gives rise to a
subjective sensation consciousness in
other words the the these are tough
questions we don't have answers to at
all but in terms of
mind body i think this is just an
ancient issue about the thought that
mind being immaterial couldn't possibly
have effects on things that are purely
material you know so descartes explained
this you know that mind whatever it is
might be a spirit of some kind you know
a spirit that's inside of your body in
some way your soul your immaterial soul
is somehow rather
pushing around the physical stuff your
body and i think he thought it was in
the pineal gland inside the brain which
didn't really answer anything it just
pushed it to a different level it sort
of just kicked that explanation down the
road that non-explanation down the road
so the mind body problem is not a real
problem the software controls the
hardware how does that work well
information in a computer is stored as a
sequence of zeros and ones but what does
that mean well if you go deeper the the
ones are usually higher voltage signals
and the zeros are lower voltage signals
of some kind a voltage is a difference
in energy between
a set of charged particles one set of
charged particles usually
electrons in this case electrons and
another set of charged particles so some
of the charged particles have high
energy high voltage some have lower
energy low voltage throughout a computer
system stored in transistors capacitors
whatever you have a pattern of such
charges high and low voltages which
represent the zeros and ones in the
memory of the computer and as they move
around the circuits you're getting
movement of these high and low voltages
so you've got actual physical things
moving around but the pattern
is
not material right because you can
represent that
pattern of stuff as
sequences of zeros and ones written on a
standard piece of paper or on a
blackboard or
typed out in a document somewhere so
that's abstract that's not material
because it's independent of its physical
substrate but
it has to be instantiated somewhere and
once you put it into the computer and
then you hit run on the computer program
well then what you've got going on is a
whole bunch of physical interactions so
this is what's going on with the mind
okay i'm explaining how software
affects hardware but it's exactly the
same principle because what's going on
is the
circuitry through the computer or the
pattern of electricity that's moving
through your neurons is actually
physical forces upon
things so if we just stick to computers
because they're i think they're better
understood you know your normal silicon
computer is that
in a normal computer the reason why the
hardware does anything at all why it
moves so to speak why the pixels
illuminate why the speakers make noise
why the
printer ribbon prints
and so on and so forth why stuff gets
pushed around in the hardware is because
of that pattern of zeros and ones the
pattern of zeros and ones represented as
voltages and the voltages
have high and low energy and the
electrons can push things because
they're they're actual they're actually
charged particles that can repel one
another and those repulsions are
physical forces so that's it the the the
abstractions have
physical effects via that mechanism via
that physical mechanism but they can't
be reduced to nothing but that after all
as we say you can take that pattern of
zeros and ones once more and write them
out by hand as zeros and ones on a piece
of paper and there it is you know there
it is it's different to
the voltages at that point and the same
must be true of what's going on
in the brain so i so i think it's not a
problem it's been solved it's been
solved by us
having a modern understanding of
computation and how computation works
okay on to
um
next question from chrisman chrisman
frank
would love to hear you talk about the
ways deutsch has improved on poppa and
james baird has said plus one okay so
absolutely and even david
has admitted this um you know he's very
modest he doesn't admit to improving on
popular in many ways but he does say
that the innovation in the beginning of
infinity is that he has explained what
an explanation is
and he did that because people asked and
so he thought about all the different
kinds of explanations there were but
certainly
as a
as a specific thing coming up with this
idea of hard to vary while still doing
the job of explaining papa never had
that and
generalizing that as being the
well i shouldn't say generalizing
emphasizing that that really is the key
not only in science but everywhere that
we're after these good
explanations and this really is the line
of demarcation between
science and non-science
you can have
falsifiable theories which is what
popper of course came up with he figured
out that line of demarcation but that's
necessary but not sufficient in science
to explain the difference between for
example a homeopathic nostrum a
homeopathic treatment and actual
medicine the actual medical treatment
that is going to make claims about
treating a person's illness but so too
is the homeopathic remedy so they're
both going to be testable but that
doesn't mean just because of the fact it
is testable that the homeopathic remedy
is
scientific at all it contains within it
a bad explanation about how
homeopathy works so this this
distinction between good explanations
and bad explanations is certainly an
innovation by david deutsch and an
improvement on papa i would also say
that david has really certainly in my
mind linked morality in epistemology
with this claim about
do not destroy the means of error
correction that error correction is the
thing that we need in order to continue
to make progress and i don't think papa
quite had that and so there's this
computational digital view of
epistemology which bleeds into morality
in a way and i think that's an
improvement on pop-up popper was there
with the way in which we need to have
progress
but whether it was tied to error
correction as explicitly as in the work
of david deutsch i'm not sure i think i
think david's improved on that and of
course the emphasis on optimism
there is a flavor of optimism which i
think we could call
optimism in the style of david deutsch
that is unique and stands apart from any
other kind of optimism that even exists
today amongst the various other
optimists as well and wasn't really
there
in the same way in the work of kyle
popper an explicit and very good
explanation about why probability fails
in so many places is something i don't
think papa quite got at but david deutch
does and as i mentioned earlier with my
favorite chapter in the fabric of
reality i think david really gets the
heart of the matter about articulating
what the nature of mathematics is so i
think he improves on poppa there as well
and of course
absolutely explaining quantum theory i
think popper tried to explain quantum
theory he failed
but david deutsch has managed to do that
i think he even improves on everett
for that matter i mean everett was the
first one to come up with this idea of
the multiverse but david deutsch has
brought it to a whole bunch more people
explained it more clearly and so that's
an improvement that's an improvement on
papa it's an improvement on his
predecessors as well and of course my
personal
favorite of um all of these advances
that i think david deutch has made is on
the nature of personhood i think the
advance in what he has said about what a
person is something that is
just plagued philosophers for
generations millennia to try and figure
out what is it that that's about that is
in us as human beings that is different
to all other creatures that are out
there everyone has come at this who's
thought about this and written about
this and talked about this from a
different angle all of which capture
aspects i would say
of what the heart of the matter is now
that we understand and people would say
oh we've got morality or we've got art
we've got the ability to do science and
this separates us from the lower
creatures
but all of those are mere manifestations
of the capacity to generate explanations
of the world which give us a real
connection to the rest of reality
because the rest of reality is what
we're trying to explain and the fact
that it's explicable by us makes us very
special in this universe and tells us
something about what we are it's not the
final answer to what a person is after
all we don't know how it is that we
generate explanations but that we do
generate explanations separates us from
everything else this connection to
explanatory knowledge and i think so
that is absolutely a philosophical
insight that stands alongside
anything from the canon of western
and ancient philosophy okay next
question mike stern what is one of the
core ideas from the beginning of
infinity that you found most difficult
to re-explain
or clarify for people new to this work
and why
um
i guess sustainability sustainability is
a hard one it's such a a common word
thrown around these days
and it carries these very strong moral
overtimes and so trying to explain
that the only thing that's sustainable
for us if we want to sustain ourselves
in other words survive off into an
infinite future is constant progress
constant consumption of resources
constantly increasing our population
increasing our wealth spreading out
beyond the earth this is the only thing
that's sustainable for us and not only
us but if you care about the panda bears
if you care about the dolphins if you
care about the forests you want to hope
that we can sustain the increased
population wealth creation and power of
people because we know as a matter of
science that if we don't do this
everything absolutely everything on this
earth including the earth itself will
vanish in a cosmological event of some
sort or other whether it is the sun
eventually expanding to engulf the earth
or something near the earth or an
asteroid or a number of asteroids
hitting the earth or a supernova going
off nearby eventually over the next
billion years or so
life on earth will be exterminated us
and everything else if you don't want
that to happen then there's no point
trying to sustain things at the present
level to try and ensure the environment
is unchanging
to try and ensure that climate does not
change
it's interesting that that we accept as
a sort of moral maxim that the only
constant is change
except when it comes to the climate that
we
seemingly know the climate is changing
but we don't want it to well
whether humans do it or not it's going
to change and so we should deal with
that change possibly the best idea is to
learn to live with the change in some
way or other if we're not going to
actively try and reverse the change but
this is where sustainability is brought
up always in these concerns about the
environment concerns about people just
being a kind of evil that need to be
damped down in terms of population
growth always population growth is
regarded as being the thing that is
unsustainable but in fact it's the only
thing that is sustainable and so this is
really hard to get across to people and
i think of all the messages in the
bidding of infinity this is the one that
is yet to make
inroads but needs to make inroads
significant inroads because governments
around the world are absolutely captured
by the notion that population for
example is a pressing urgent problem but
many of us on the other side of the
ledge i think well we agree it's a
pressing urgent problem but we need we
need more we need more people we need a
greater population of people living at a
higher standard of living but of course
on the other side you hear people saying
things we need fewer people and they
need to be living more like our
ancestors they need to not have so much
wealth because the wealth is creating
pollution and waste and and
and changing the environment and we want
to keep the environment as it is we you
can't do that without well if you want
to keep the environment the same you
need a significant amount more wealth
and more power and more technology in
order to stop the climate from changing
because even if we quit all fossil fuels
tomorrow and even if we left the earth
to its own devices the climate will
change that's just the nature of climate
it's it's like the weather but on longer
scales longer time scales so this is the
thing that's really hard to get across
so there's that and related to that is
infinite progress i mean
just so many people find it unbelievable
fantastical that we could have infinite
progress that literally
humans and their descendants will just
go on forever solving problems and
making this universe a better and better
place and we could we could be the first
generation to be a part of that
if only we worked harder to make more
wealth and to solve problems and so on
and so forth and so it's hard to explain
those two things without getting caught
up in the emotion and and the politics
and encountering people that are touchy
on these particular topics that are that
are wedded
to things like the you know concern for
the environment and they just uh
dogmatically committed to the idea that
humans bad pollution bad
waste bad large population bad and and
and just
persuading them of the opposite
is thwart with all sorts of political
divisions and moral hazards
do you think there are ideas within the
beginning of infinity it's mike's next
question are there ideas in the
beginning infinity that trace back
farther than the enlightenment say to
judeo-christian ideas values or myths
yes sure every idea has a lineage now
i'm not one of these people necessarily
i hear some conservative commentators
say but really there are two pillars to
our civilization
philosophically speaking one is the
greek tradition of philosophy and the
other is the judeo-christian ideas i
think the the greek tradition tradition
is
far more important far more important
for a whole bunch of reasons we won't go
into right now but yet the
judeo-christian ideas
do have a place and i think they were an
escape from an even more primitive more
brutish
way of existing in the world bad as it
was you know i would happily live
2 000 years ago
under a christian or jewish theocracy
than in a hunter gather a tribe
somewhere or other sure the morality was
oppressive but it wasn't as bad as the
constant warfare and the constant
mistreatment of people within those
societies
it was an improvement incremental
perhaps but uh an improvement
nonetheless and i guess key the key
thing
from the beginning of infinity that
really comports in some way one might
say
with
many of the the major religions
is this the
centrality of the person which is lost
in atheism to a large extent if you
simply have atheism
or if you simply have uh some other sort
of political ideology like for example
forms of marxism and things that flow
from marxism communism socialism where
you end up with
the value of the collective over the
individual
in fact you lose sight of the individual
person and the importance of the
individual person then all sorts of bad
stuff follows so the beginning affinity
certainly
places the person there as the unit
which
creates generates explanatory knowledge
and its explanatory knowledge which
transforms the world transforms reality
around us for the better putting that
person putting the person back at the
center putting planet earth as a hub
has something to do with with things
with religions like christianity which
uh were the first crude attempt of doing
something like that i don't think
there's anything whatsoever in the
infinity which is at all mythological or
religious
it's more coincidence than anywhere than
anything else
except in so far as there is definitely
virtue in putting people putting a
person at the center of your concerns
within a society if you're setting up a
society having the person there and so i
don't the christians and
jewish people and other people who are
involved in major religions they i think
would have the
inexplicit understanding that people are
absolutely central to this whole project
without being able to articulate why i
think the beginning of infinity
articulates why from an analytical
philosophical tradition and a scientific
viewpoint so yeah i guess that would be
the way in which i'd trace that
that particular idea the centrality of
the person from the beginning of
infinity back to antecedents that exist
in
um
religion but i don't think david deutsch
got it from religion at all i think he
got it by independent means okay next
question from oh falabolista
how do you see the spread of deutschean
ideas in the future what is the plan the
plan i don't think there is
a plan the plan it sounds a little bit
like a secret cabal uh well it's more up
to you and anyone else listening really
my hope would be that these ideas in the
future continue to gain traction and
inform individuals more and more when
they do that they can inform groups of
people they can then inform the social
well-being of whole communities among
other things and civilization as a whole
the messages in the beginning affinity
give you if you take them on board and
there are certain other philosophies
like this as well they
can help treat i think the malaise that
is happening right now cause people to
not be terrified of other people
constantly or terrified of tomorrow or
despairing about tomorrow
it can lead you to have greater
understanding and compassion for an
interest in others interesting in others
as a beginning of infinity interest in
others as being sources of ideas as
being generators of explanations as
being solvers of problems that's what we
want and this is why i say we need more
and more people we need a greater
population not a smaller population the
only thing that we have a poverty of is
ideas we don't have a poverty of
resources we need more and more ideas
about how to get more and more resources
in fact and how to solve the problems
that are going to be before us and
eventually there's going to be a problem
that far outstrips anything we've dealt
with hitherto as a modern civilization
so we better want to hope that there's
going to be a smart person out there
that can contribute crucially to the
solving of that experiment and the more
people we have the more
likelihood there's going to be that at
least one of us creative people can come
up with a solution in time so this is
what we need in the future more people
to have this stance of thinking of their
neighbors as
important means by which we can all
solve our problems but there's no
there's no centralized plan on this and
i don't think a centralized plan would
be good at all everyone should have
their own plan what i'm doing is a
podcast
many of us are trying to promote these
ideas
publicly and more people should do this
and more power to more people
in doing this whether it can become even
bigger even better inform people that
have
even more
wealth and power and influence
well the future will tell the future
will tell but certainly
we're trying and with naval on board
the reach of these ideas has certainly
increased over the last few years and
will continue to increase we only hope
it happens
in time as i say i am hopeful that will
happen in time i'm optimistic it will
happen in time
i'm not despairing that the problem is
going to
be encountered that we can't solve okay
so
on to the next question from rich martin
you've advocated for rapid general
progress and yet careful incremental
changes to our institutions this seems
to be a contradiction how do we resolve
it great question
rich yes i do um sometimes i think i've
misspoken on this in that i've said um
slow
changes to our institutions now rich
hasn't said that here but thinking back
to what i've said i i may have seemingly
contradicted myself but the way in which
rich has put it there is not a
contradiction at all because and this is
the way i do like to emphasize it the
way rich has put it there i want rapid
progress but at the same time i want
incremental changes incremental changes
means
you just change a small thing
and then you check to see it's been
actual objective improvement and that
can take some time but ideally you would
want incremental a a change reflection
judgment evaluation if you might say
before moving on to the next change
observation of what's going on judgment
evaluation of what's happened so you
know that these incremental changes are
in the right direction so we want as
many of them as quickly as possible and
as many of those incremental changes as
possible in
quick succession would amount to rapid
general progress for institutions so i'm
not for wholesale there's a lot of talk
at the moment i don't think these people
necessarily we hope they don't have um a
huge amount of influence and power
people who want to completely upend the
way in which
the major democracies of the world
operate the way in which they work the
way in which they have shown themselves
to be resilient over time and allow for
this this stable incremental rapid
ratcheting up of the rate at which
progress can occur progress has only
occurred in the enlightenment tradition
across europe parts of asia now
uh the anglosphere because of these
institutions which allow for
rapid progress so there is no
contradiction there so the only time i
have kind of contradicted myself if i
think back and maybe i'm just being not
very generous to myself but i think i
might have said um let's have
slow changes to our institutions and
rapid progress you know everywhere else
kind of thing but by slow i think i you
know intended to say something like
incremental as richard said there but
incremental doesn't mean slow digital
systems are incremental they they move
by increments you know one thing at a
time is done one task is accomplished
then before you move on to the next one
and so when i say an incremental change
in institution check to see this one
change has had the desired effect and if
it doesn't reverse it undo it go back
and try something else that's the way in
which incremental change happens but you
can do that as rapidly as you like so no
contradiction um next question from matt
mcgann in the spirit of criticism
because you've thought the most about
this stuff i'd like to know which parts
of david were david's work you think are
incorrect or you disagree with and along
the same lines paul simptis has asked
what did david get wrong
or you disagree with um both interesting
questions i think i've been asked these
multiple times over the years now um so
i might
i'd have to take a step back in order to
answer this properly and to explain why
i'm giving the answer that i'm about to
give
well
because i really became a fan
of the work of david deutsch soon after
the fabric of reality was published so
that's you know 1997
25 years ago or something as i've said
before i was in the fortunate position
to be a part of a community where we
were able to discuss these ideas with
david directly so all the times that i
thought i disagreed with david about the
contents of the fabric of reality all
the times i thought you know i'm smart
i'm a physics student i've studied
philosophy and so on i got to put my
questions to david himself i got to have
them answered and clarified
and through that process i ended up
being persuaded that i was wrong david
was right and the same happened after
the publication of the beginning of
infinity i read it multiple times and in
doing that you know on the first reading
you might think i don't really get that
i don't really understand it um i think
i disagree you read it again you go oh i
get where he's coming from and if i
still disagreed i would be able to go to
david he was very receptive and very
helpful in
responding to questions and persuading
me that
i was looking at things in a way
that wasn't what he intended and you
know so on and so forth he would clarify
things and so then i'd come to a deeper
understanding of this entire world view
so since the podcast has been going and
it's only been going for what four years
or something i think um
podbean and youtube telling me uh have
told me that it's about mid-2018 it
seems longer than that or something but
anyway mid-2018 is only how long the
podcast has been going for
so all the time before that back to 1997
really was something like me working
through all the places where i i thought
i disagreed with david but when you
disagree
that typically means in these cases that
you misunderstand something so although
i thought i disagreed i actually
misunderstood and in talking about the
ideas i realized where the
misunderstanding was i understood came
to understand and then i agreed and so
in large part because of that because i
came to agree with the contents of the
books and because the contents of the
books were so amazing and all my
questions that i ever had were addressed
adequately you know and i got to a point
where i thought well there's nothing
that i find i really strongly disagree
with at all or disagree with at all and
so that's the motivation for the podcast
really i mean like the better question
is why would you make a podcast about
this book well because it's a book where
not only are the insights so amazing but
i can't find a place where i really
have any significant disagreements with
the book at all and so that's why i'm
promoting it so much and i think it's
you know one of the reasons apart from
the fact that it's civilizationally
important but i don't find any
errors
in there it might seem astonishing for
me to say that that i can't find a place
where i disagree but
that's the fact i i don't
now me personally and you know when i'm
explaining the ideas of course i have a
personal bias and a personal emphasis
which might be slightly different to
what david does but that's just personal
taste it's not
actual explicit disagreement so far as i
can tell so
what did david get wrong i guess the
most generous way i can put that is i
don't know what do i disagree with
nothing that i can think of and i have
thought about this before previously
next question from
hamza why does deutsch object to the
fact that morality is about suffering
what does it mean when morality is
considered to be a question of what to
do next do moral facts exist because of
our existence is free will consciousness
explanatory knowledge fundamentally
tired um why does deutsch object to the
fact that morality is about suffering
does he or does he just say that that
can't be a foundation and the reason it
can't be a foundation is because you
don't need a foundation anywhere we
don't need a foundation in physics we
can always ask why the foundations are
the way they are what we're after is
good explanations and that's true in
physics and biology and history and it's
true in morality as well so i think that
morality
certainly explanations within morality
can touch upon suffering and the
alleviation of suffering no problem
whatsoever
the distinction is between whether or
not suffering and the alleviation of
suffering utilitarianism and those kind
of um consequentialist arguments in
morality whether that has to be your
final ultimate unalterable foundation
for morality or whether you might also
need to consider other things so whether
your problem situation might entail
not regarding suffering as being the
most important thing as i like to say my
my thinking on this is there will still
be moral questions questions about what
we should do next absent suffering i
think suffering is a solvable problem
it's a soluble problem
suffering is something like
pain with an explanation accompanying it
so you could have mental suffering
mental language so you're going through
this mental pain this stress whatever
else you want to call it that's a form
of suffering you're being coerced into
suffering even if someone's not
literally sticking pins into your thumbs
you might be coerced in some way shape
or form even if you're not under in
physical pain you can be in mental
language that's a form of suffering we i
can imagine a a universe in which that's
alleviated which people aren't routinely
coercing one another into things
everyone's just
freely exploring the
right thing to do for them and they're
not hurting anyone else and everyone's
being rational and reasonable and so on
so there's no mental suffering that's
for physical suffering i can imagine a
world in which we overcome that as well
via technology and medicine and
an advanced distant future where
pain has been alleviated for the most
part or or entirely you know i can
imagine a world in which we exist in
that state but that doesn't mean that
morality ends even if suffering has
there would still be a question about
what to do next you know what projects
to undertake in your own personal life
civilizationally what we should do
should we go to this planet or that
planet should we embrace this
architecture for the next best computer
or that architecture we're building a
virtual reality environment which one do
you want to go into and to experience so
on and so forth add infinitum which
physics theory do you want to get on
board with and make contributions to
what you should do is a moral question
right this is the central
question in morality what should you do
next and if you're suffering you should
try and alleviate your suffering
obviously but that's a solid any
particular moral question is a soluble
one and the question of suffering is
soluble i think even the the buddhists
accept this the the
the the best understanding of what
they're about is dissatisfaction and so
i don't think all dissatisfaction
is
suffering you know you can be
dissatisfied be not um content with
where you are right now i don't know if
that necessarily means you're suffering
you might have a whole bunch of options
before you all of which are great but
you need to try and figure out which of
these fantastic options that are before
you in a world of no suffering that you
want to do next and that's a moral
question so that that deals with the
first two questions
do moral facts exist independent of our
existence well it depends on what you
mean by our if you mean
human beings that live right now well
yes uh they they do i mean because there
could be other people in the universe
and i think that has to answer the
question i mean there are people who
existed in the past so those moral facts
existed for them
but if you just take away
all people everywhere well i think the
question is like
does history exist without our existence
you know does does politics exist
without our existence does art exist
or uh beauty exists without our
existence and i think that question is i
think those
style of questions
aren't solving a problem here's what i
would say now what problem you're trying
to solve in
determining whether or not these moral
facts can exist without
a priority the existence of any person
ever anywhere it's kind of like does
human biology exist in some ontological
way without humans ever having evolved
in the universe well
what problem are we solving by even
trying to come at that question it's a
very very abstract very removed from any
practical issue
question
it's i would say it's like pseudo
philosophy kind of thing
what place does morality have absent any
conscious creatures whatsoever well i
don't think it's a it's like a necessary
truth almost absent a physical universe
of any kind what is the meaning of
mathematics you know does mathematics
exist well nothing exists if you don't
have a physical universe of any sort
we could get ourselves tied up in these
pseudo problems until the end of time so
yeah is free will consciousness
explanatory knowledge
fundamentally tied yes i think so i
think all of these things are
fundamentally tied we don't know how
and i should say we don't have an
explanation um
i conjecture ways in my blog if you look
up i think the title of the blog is
something like free will consciousness
and knowledge something like that or
creativity and knowledge for people
watching on youtube i'll put it up on
the screen i'll put a link on the screen
try to remember to anyway yeah i think
that
something like my
perhaps too clever by half way of
explaining this is to say that
the creative act of
explaining something
is what it feels like to be conscious so
your that that experience of being a
creative entity is what we call
consciousness now for anyone outside of
you observing you they can't observe
your consciousness but they can observe
your creative outputs which is the
unique thing about you is your creative
output and the thing that distinguishes
people in general from all other animals
and if this is true of course this
solves a whole bunch of moral issues
which i won't get into right now but it
would say that consciousness is tied to
the capacity to create explanatory
knowledge it may not be i'm happy to be
wrong about that now free will
is this capacity to choose to create
explanatory knowledge
and
people can
choose to
be fully focused on the creative
enterprise or not and this is where free
will comes in now many people disagree
with free will but you know
i think that free will is just this term
that helps to explain what is going on
with people if you want to do away with
it and say well
you know people ultimately aren't
the choosers of their choices okay well
yeah nothing is the ultimate cause of
anything okay there's always going to be
another explanation another layer at
which you can get to that explains the
thing that's happening now but if i say
the thing that's happening now is a
choice is being made why is the choice
being made because i'm freely able to do
so and my my will is free i'm free to
choose amongst these different things
and one of the things i'm freely
choosing to do is to use my will in
order to generate explanations well yeah
if you don't want to use free will i
just say i find i have to do linguistic
acrobatics in order to deny the
existence of free will this is why i
endorse it so i think these things are
absolutely tied together
well observed yes next question from
christian dean taking deutsche popper
seriously ein rahn's objectivism seems
to be the only current
socio-political theory that follows from
them your thoughts on it and if it
survives criticism must it eventually
prevail
um
follows for i don't know if it follows
from them does it um oh look i'm not an
iron rand scholar i'm a fan of euron
brook i
in
listening to iron rand in reading
iron ron's work i just personally find
euron brook much more captivating much
more compelling a better expositor of
those ideas than ayn rand was i think
iran was wrong in many many ways of
course my central interest in a lot of
these things is epistemology
and so
of course i have major gripes with the
epistemology but also the morality as
well so that's where i think she's wrong
but
you know i'm still a fan of a sort but
i'm more a fan of euron brooke as i say
i think that euron
using the ideas of iron round does the
best job of
defending free markets that i know of
and defending capitalism and defending
freedom and so on i think that it's a
really well informed robust
resilient way of explaining the facility
of those things the moral importance of
those things i think rand was and
remains absolutely an iconoclastic
thinker and i agree there's
virtue to for example selfishness but i
think she underestimates um things like
tradition tradition is really really
important in explicit knowledge really
really important i don't think it makes
uh it's not mentioned uh
in
her work in explicit knowledge and i
certainly i get that notion from iran
who has certainly animated to debate for
example conservatives on this point they
should otherwise be on a similar side of
the ledger i think um the main fight
right now is against authoritarians on
the left side of politics
i think we do not know all the ways in
which a society remains stable over time
and we don't know all the ways that
knowledge is instantiated in our
institutions and these institutions are
important to maintain that stability and
allow for that progress and i think this
is underestimated in the work of
objectivists so i don't think that
undoing a whole bunch of them in rapid
fire is necessarily going to be a recipe
for a
better society you know um
look i'm just going to uh i haven't read
anything um this ama so let me go to
there's an article on the iron around
lexicon uh all about tradition on
eindhran's view of object of of
tradition and i'm just going to read a
paragraph here and then i'll i'll
comment on this paragraph that i read so
rand writes on the topic of tradition
quote the plea to preserve tradition as
such can appeal only to those who have
given up
or to those who never intended to
achieve anything in life it is a plea
that appeals to the worst elements in
men and rejects the best it appeals to
fear sloth cowardice conformity
self-doubt and rejects creativeness
originality courage independence
self-reliance it is an outrageous plea
to address to human beings anywhere but
particularly outrageous here in america
the country based on the principle that
man must stand on his own feet live by
his own judgment and move constantly
forward as a productive creative
innovator end quote so i think that's
just extremely confused
about the role of tradition
namely
the tradition of criticism and how this
tradition of criticism this tradition of
innovation okay so she's got innovation
there she thinks that innovation somehow
just happens
you just follow in the enlightenment
tradition
and you will get innovation but that's
just not true we don't know exactly how
it is that we've remained stable over
time great britain europe the united
states australia canada
these these places parts of asia over
long stretches of time we've managed to
continue to be innovators roughly
peacefully and it is the traditions and
the institutions that have allowed us to
do that so this innovation and this
creative stuff that ein rand loves this
individuality the courage and the
independence
happens within traditions and
specifically a tradition of criticism
that we talk about often here as well so
you know
that that's terribly misguided i think
by um
i'd love to talk to euron brooke
specifically about that kind of thing
what are the traditions and the
institutions within our society that
allow for open-ended progress and rapid
progress yes we need to value the
individual i certainly do the individual
is the prime originator of ideas and we
need to protect that but how we go about
protecting that individual is a whole
other question and to ensure a stable
society over time especially when a
whole bunch of people don't agree with
you
that the individual is so important
especially when you have a whole bunch
of people right now who think the
collective is the more important thing
and just on that passage just
i think that passage is a good example i
think
rand is bad at
persuasion now the people who like rand
like grant but the people who don't can
you see why
i can yes of course she's terribly
forthright and she's honest about the
contents of her own mind the problem is
that that style
turns people off and you want to have to
be a realist on that point or not the
realistic take is your style of speaking
and writing is turning people off but
i'm just being honest well not good
enough some of your ideas are absolutely
fantastic but if you want those ideas to
be persuasive to really take off you
need a new way of packaging them so
thank god for your ron brooke on this
point because he is seemingly willing to
engage in these discussions in a much
more
friendly way and i think a lot of the
objectivists are much more friendly now
so you know in a passage like that you
know it's understandable that some
people get turned off by being told you
know
they've given up or that they're sloths
or sloth-like
i think that the the this use of
pejoratives fails to achieve what she
hopes it's like you know when certain
famous biologists insult religious
people or even religious ways of
thinking when you end up getting focused
on the contents of a particular
individual's mind rather than certain
objective ideas out there it just turns
people off you know
the the the new atheists at times
were only ever speaking to their fan
base they were never really persuading
people to give up on religion because
the way in which they went about it was
hectoring and insulting and you know
some of us quite enjoyed you know
watching christopher hitchens get up
there you know and give it to
whoever the bible thumping priest was
fun okay that's all fun but in terms of
a person who was a follower of the bible
you were on the side of the bible
thumper and you weren't persuaded by
christopher hitchens some were some
people were but you know if this was a
good technique why weren't a majority of
people persuaded why aren't they
persuaded to listen to people who
hector yeah act like that so yeah
there's a sense in which just tone and
use of language has a lot to do with how
persuasive a particular message is going
to be that's just
reality
oh and of course the finally on iron
here um i can't stand the word the term
objectivism the self-described
objectivism especially when the
epistemology is totally subjectivist for
reasons i won't go into now talked about
this at length on other podcasts and
even the morality is subjectivist it's
all about the the individual which is
important it's part of morality but it
can't be the basis
go back to the previous question for
that one next questions from michael
chang when we say that a phenomenon
requires explanation such as the initial
conditions of the universe what is the
problem that such an explanation solves
if a problem is a conflict between ideas
what are the ideas that are in conflict
in this situation in that situation the
conflict is between the various
different initial conditions that could
have obtained at the beginning of the
universe why were the initial conditions
what they were
rather than something else so the
initial conditions of the universe
require explanation because they could
have been otherwise so far as we know
there have been attempts over time from
mathematically minded types to try and
produce a set of initial conditions that
are necessarily the case
given some deeper set of physical laws
so if you went below the laws of physics
as they are known general relativity and
quantum theory if you went below them to
some ultimate theory of everything kind
of thing then out of that ultimate
theory of everything would come the
initial conditions and those initial
conditions are just there necessarily
as as the case now even if we could come
up with a solution like that to the
reason why the initial conditions are
the way they are because they are
necessarily the case we still have the
question as to why those deeper laws of
physics that ultimate theory of
everything is the way it is and why it
wasn't some other particular law of
physics now as for the initial
conditions necessarily falling out in a
particular way i don't know it's the
prevailing view amongst quantum
cosmologists particle physicists and so
on and so forth uh i think most people
expect that the initial conditions could
have been otherwise that whatever the
successor to quantum theory is a quantum
theory of gravity or something like that
that the parameters these initial
conditions could have been otherwise now
perhaps constructive theory can have
something to say about this i don't know
i'm not an expert just apologies as well
at this point if you can hear any tap
tap tapping it's because i'm
experiencing a fairly heavy rainstorm at
the moment here in sydney and it's uh
and so large drops of rain are coming
horizontally up against the window right
now second question from michael how can
we reconcile the claimed objectivity of
knowledge with the apparent subjectivity
of problems problems only exist if
solving them is useful but utility is
defined with respect to a particular
person what may be useful to one person
may not be useful to another
okay so here
i think you may be conflating two kinds
of objectivity the objectivity of
knowledge means that the knowledge is
out there in the world instantiated in
things other than subjective minds
individual minds so it can be written in
books it can be instantiated in
computers it can even be in physical
objects as i like to say like telescopes
instantiate the knowledge of how to
focus light so that's the sense in which
the knowledge is out there in objects
now the subjectivity of problems means
that
the subject an individual person has a
problem so there's no problem here
sometimes you there's no real issue here
there's no need to reconcile these
things it's just the fact that a person
has
problems and those problems can
sometimes be resolved by calling on
objective knowledge if my personal
subjective problem is hmm
i don't really think that jupiter has
planets going around it that's my
subjective problem i don't believe all
the images i've ever been shown so
that's your subjective problem now if
you take a telescope the telescope
instantiates objective knowledge of a
how to focus light as i said and it will
reveal to you and it will solve your
problem about how many moons you can see
orbiting jupiter and you say utility is
defined with respect to a particular
person what may be useful to one person
may not be used tonight yep i agree with
that um you know you might also have
utility for a particular community as
well but more often than not in these
cases you're going to be drawing upon
objective knowledge
treatments in medicine are kind of like
this a treatment for one person might
not be an effective treatment for
another person but it will still the
treatments whatever they are still
constitute objective knowledge even
though the subjectivity of the problem
is going to come down to a personal very
personal biology and the way in which
that personal anatomy physiology biology
interacts with a particular medicine a
particular treatment and third question
from michael you've said differences
between humans and machines is
humans can create new choices but
machines only of a search over a
predefined set of possibilities aren't
new choices just abstractions over more
primitive possibilities though couldn't
machines also generate new choices via
abstraction okay so if a machine can
generate new choices via abstraction
then they would be a general purpose
choice generator a general purpose
problem solver they would be people and
in that case machine would be a
pejorative it would be insulting a
machine
is mechanized it's an automaton of some
kind so it has to obey a particular
sequence of steps it's just doing one
thing after another it's following a
particular it's slavishly following a
program a human's not doing that as we
say humans creating new choices so
that's my delineation well other people
might have different delineations but
better better than saying humans and
machines we could just say humans and
non-humans or better yet more general
people and non-people okay so people are
these things that can create new choices
because they generate new explanations
which bring things into the world that
hit us who weren't there and so
therefore they can choose among these
new things i think the example i've used
before is once you have the explanation
of nuclear physics
and perhaps the engineering explanation
of how to create a fission reactor then
you have the choice you have a new
choice before you didn't have before
namely do you want to continue to
produce energy via or electricity via
the method of burning coal using a
turbine or do you want to use the heat
generated via the fission reactions in
uranium in a uranium nuclear reactor to
generate electricity both of them will
boil the water and create the steam that
you need but you have a choice that you
didn't have before because you didn't
understand nuclear physics now if a
machine could come up with generating
that kind of new choice if it could
generate an explanation for example a an
artificial intelligence of the future if
it was able to create a proper
explanation which had predictions and so
on of how to use i don't know quarks of
some kind some kind of exotic quark in
order to
generate a kind of fusion reaction that
hit the two we didn't know about um and
a tiny amount of matter was able to
produce a stupendous amount of energy if
a machine did that i think we should
accept or an artificial intelligence
could do that i think we should accept
we're in the presence of an explanation
generator we're in the presence of a
person and presumably that thing could
be asked questions if indeed it can
explain something like this
sophisticated scientific theory
presumably it could also explain what
it's experiencing right now if it's
experiencing something we're in the
presence of a person and not merely
something that could be or should be
described as a mean machine like a car
so uh a question from a patron who
didn't quite get in before the deadline
last time but i've included him here
from anders hi brett one of your patrons
here and a big fan thanks for all that
you do two quick questions number one it
seems in general that many of the many
from the popper deutsche school seem to
be fairly libertarian you and naval case
in point did popular deutsche influence
this direction or do you consider their
thoughts agnostic between for example
libertarianism and conservatism as long
as error correction is maximized ah well
let's deal with that one straight away
yeah definitely that i think my road to
embracing freedom more than i did
previously was absolutely helped along
by david deutch absolutely helped along
by karl popper once i understood that
what we need is rapid progress every
time i saw a thing out there in the
world which seemed to slow down progress
for bad reasons i thought was an urgent
problem that needed addressing you know
i take seriously this idea uh from
february to begin infinity that you know
we would be immortal now if there
weren't these times during which
progress halted slowed down stopped we
should want to have more and more rapid
progress and uh there are people on
against that and uh
i'm against authority in every way
shape and form i think it is the
antithesis
of people being able to freely
individually explore the space of ideas
solve their own problems once you have
an authority making a decision for
everyone then if that decision is the
wrong decision then everyone makes the
same wrong decision everyone makes the
same error you don't know
what a correct decision might have been
but if you have you know 10 000 people
each doing subtly different things even
if
9 000 of them all end up in failure
you've learned something from the one
well you've learned something from the 9
000 people who failed but you also know
that hey those 1 000 people have
something to teach the rest of you
but if you have an authoritarian system
where well
all 10 000 people are just going to have
to do exactly the same thing then if it
goes wrong and we should expect it to
not be perfect and it will go wrong in
some way shape or form we've only
trialled out the one idea so this is the
argument for libertarianism or forms of
libertarianism uh i would just say
anti-authoritarianism in whatever way
shape or form that is which is why you
know i appeal to people who are against
authoritarianism to broadly come
together because i think that's the main
fight is against authoritarianism and so
broadly speaking modern conservatives
are against authoritarianism
libertarians broadly speaking are
against authoritarianism the iron round
objectivists are against
authoritarianism the free marketeers are
against authoritarianism so and that is
that is the major concern i have now i
share that with
many other people so so once you value
progress knowledge creation creativity
you realize that the enemy of creativity
and the enemy of reason is coercion
authority force that kind of thing and
so you're led down this road now of
course many of us on this side in this
particular
strand of uh the papillion world view
the david deutscher's world view still
value tradition as i said earlier for
all the reasons i said and those
traditions they have guard rails of a
kind that doesn't mean the guardrails
can't be changed or tinkered with and so
on and so forth but it just means that
outside of those guard rails we know
that there are ways towards chaos and
the ending of progress because all the
other dead civilizations didn't have
those same guard rails even in the best
cases where you have you know
athenian society they had some guard
rails but the guard rails apparently
were not sufficient in order to preserve
their society now our guard rails are
like you know the very fast train that's
going along these guardrails is making
rapid progress that doesn't mean you
can't change the gauge now and again
that doesn't mean you can't make
improvements along the way but you have
to take seriously the idea that at the
moment you've got the best thing that
has ever existed so far
and
when you start talking about devaluing
tradition for example what you're saying
is what's working so far what has worked
so far there's a problem with it for
reasons of we could only go faster if
only if if only if we just took the
rails away maybe the train would go
faster if only if we threw the engine
away maybe we could get the train to go
faster if only we stopped using this
fuel and we just threw that fuel into
the engine even though that fuel doesn't
work in that engine maybe the train will
go faster and we'll have more rapid
progress more creativity greater
innovation all that kind of thing so
this is why we value tradition and
institutions because none of us really
know exactly all the reasons why this
particular train this train of rapid
progress works as well as it does but we
have some explaining to do with that
that's part of this open-ended game of
explanation that we're playing
is not only in making scientific
advances and moral advances but also
understanding our own culture that's
really really important part of this and
the way in which we understand anything
is via this libertarian view of things
what the authoritarians tend to say
these days of course is the train itself
in and of itself is an evil and we need
to stop the train uh we need to turn the
train around go in the other direction
or we need to destroy this train and
just start all over again okay which is
an absolute recipe for disaster and
everyone the conservatives libertarians
the objectivists
are people in free marketeers we need to
be on the same side against that because
that is a really strong push right now
um so are there thoughts agnostic
between libertarians and conservatives
possibly i don't know enough about
especially the work of karl popper on
what his view of the distinction there
might be i know that
he definitely valued tradition of course
absolutely so he may have been more
conservative kind of thing less
libertarian don't know but certainly
valued freedom and you know these people
are you know everyone from
mill and adam smith through to rand and
through to popper they they value
freedom and liberty in slightly
different ways to different extents but
that's what we need to concentrate on
now the fact that they all value
liberty okay next question it seems
there is a beef between popper deutsch
and the formal education system is this
elaborated anywhere in their text not
covered to my recollection of boi or for
in general they're good resources for
the papillion view on child rearing yeah
you need to look up um taking children
seriously um on the do explain podcasts
sarah gave an interview about the taking
children seriously philosophy and
michael golding is also an expert in
this area louie tannet's next birthday
and of course david deutsch who
originated this particular philosophy
this idea of non-coercion in child
rearing and that's a complex issue
that's not simply
just let the child run free on the
highway and let them do what they want
no it is far more nuanced than that
you have to have a proper sophisticated
philosophical view of what non-coercion
is uh it's just to say that and again
you can
as with anything else um you can
infinitely improve and iterate and then
just improve parenting parenting today
is a heck of a lot better than it was
five generations ago clearly same as
education is clearly you know i i've
spent a lot of time in education i have
a problem a lot of problems with the
formal education system it is a system
of indoctrination it is uh increasingly
politicized it's increasingly seen as a
body of facts and insofar as i think i
was tweeting about this recently well i
was i did a thread on this recently
about um the idea that you hear teachers
and academics exalting the praises of
teaching them how to think rather than
what to think but i just think that you
know this whole idea of how to think is
a real dead end in education right now
children are being taught how to think
how to think in the wrong way how to
defer to authorities how to think about
things like inequality how to think
about things like capitalism and so on
and so forth so it leads to a whole
bunch of really bad wants so i'm
extremely
skeptical critical of these pushes for
teaching children how to think in a
school i think schools are ill-equipped
to teach children critical thinking i
tried while i was there in the schooling
system to bring in a certain vision of
what critical thinking is to to make it
really critical of the curriculum as it
was but uh there was very little love
for that kind of thing um the the
schools are increasingly i'm on the side
of the people who are very very worried
about the way in which schooling is
turning into more and more political
indoctrination it's always been a system
of indoctrination but at least you know
decades ago well not that long ago
really you know living memory decades
ago a generation ago at least it in
science class you could get science at
least in history class you could get
relatively objective history of a form
now everything's political everything's
political every single subject area
seems to be mired in climate change and
um uh denigrating people
surprisingly you know even in catholic
schools which is one place you would
hope that you had a refuge from people
individuals human beings being run down
as destructive in the environment well
there's a thing called ecotheology that
i've talked about on my podcast before
now as well so how
this happens is because there are
ideologues there are
people motivated primarily to try and
win more converts for their side of
politics it used to be the case that you
wouldn't really know what the political
views of your teachers were nowadays you
do and there is let's admit it only one
kind of politics that is really
acceptable in many many schools now good
luck if you're an actual conservative
good luck if you're actual libertarian
and trying to work within a school uh so
it's it's it's very concerning in many
ways and many children have to go
through many school students have to go
through this
fast of pretending to believe uh one
thing in order to get marks and
once they they get out hopefully they
become actual critical thinkers so there
should be a beef between the
papa deutsch view of knowledge for
example and the formal education system
after all the formal education system is
the bucket theory in action it's this
idea that you just sit in front of the
teacher and you just absorb the
knowledge right now what the mechanism
is you can fiddle at the edges with the
different teaching and learning styles
this is what educationalists and
teachers talk about but effectively
there is a body of knowledge there is a
list of facts that the student has to
acquire and they're going to be tested
on in order to achieve the
qualifications to graduate from high
school but we know this is why poppa has
this essay and objective knowledge
called the bucket and the searchlight
and the searchlight is
it's far more about coming to a critical
understanding of knowledge having a
problem situation yourself that's very
individual to you you develop your own
interests over time and you become
expert in those areas that you're
interested in this is completely
different to what school is school is
just a mishmash of everything now i
personally like school i personally did
well at school but that's just me the
overwhelming majority of people are not
like this and i don't think they should
be forced through this but it's weird
the people that often do poorly at
school they come out of school and they
want their children and uh young people
around them to do well at school
as if uh
their bad experience isn't some sort of
refutation of the system itself okay
next question the question is any
prerequisites for understanding the
beginning of infinity what else material
what other material should i read before
or with the beginning infinity that's
worth as much to improve judgment logic
and observation thanks in advance oh
sandeep um i would say
this is hard because different people
have expressed to me things that have
pushed my own intuitions around about
what i thought about the being infinity
prior to
prior to making this podcast
uh i was largely speaking to people
about the beginning of infinity who were
very much fans of the beginning of
infinity from day one kind of thing and
were kind of more on board with
the views of david deutsch and had some
understanding of physics some
understanding of epistemology and so on
and so forth so we all kind of just
thought naively i suppose that well
anyone can pick up this book and get a
lot out of it because we did but if
you're coming to this brand new i i
think well there's probably two types of
people um i think a lot of people can
absolutely pick up the book and take
away something from it and then it's how
much you take away from it i think a lot
of people can take a lot away from it
without having any background whatsoever
so it's absolutely absolutely worth
getting the book and just reading
certainly that chapter one the reach of
explanation should help a lot of people
but yeah i do accept that
once you start getting to like chapter
four creation
um
chapter six to jump to universality
um chapter eight a window on infinity
you know some of these things they're
gonna require a at least some
understanding some background in
mathematics um biology uh
even computation to a certain extent to
some extent anyway certainly chapter 11
the multiverse yeah that would not be my
first go-to
for trying to understand quantum theory
the way in which if someone had no
understanding of physics but was
interested in in getting a a reasonable
understanding of physics especially
quantum physics would be to pick up a
typical textbook just any old textbook
would wouldn't really matter what and
try and understand quantum theory from
that good luck okay you
you will struggle or go to uh youtube
these days of course and just watch a
lecture on quantum theory an
introductory lecture on quantum theory
see if you understand what's going on
maybe you will maybe you won't i would
then say
compare whatever you're getting on
youtube or from the textbook
to chapter two of the fabric of reality
shadows because it's just so clear and
simple about what's happening what's
going on there
that if you go in with an open mind i
think you come out the other end and you
just go okay well that's pretty
straightforward there's some interesting
insights there that might be hard to
take on board but i'll get to that in
the next question i think you can go a
long way to understanding aspects of
quantum theory as well as many people
understand quantum theory and then from
that you might want to go to the most
modern version of that which is the
multiverse chapter chapter 11 in the
beginning of infinity which is a step up
i would say this you know the use of the
term
fungibility and uncountably infinite
numbers of universes and all this kind
of thing uh yeah so so in that sense uh
yeah that that chapter at the beginning
affinity
i think probably has pre-requisites it's
really and naval has said you know he's
really it seems
to some people he's writing for
physicists
he's writing for his peers so
if you if you think that then yeah you
will
need some basic knowledge of science but
not as much as what people think i don't
think i think you can get through it and
i think you should uh have a go at
reading it what else could you read to
improve judgement logic and observation
um or just general thinking absolutely
read um the fabric of reality first
instead of the beginning of infinity go
for the fabric of reality um the the
chapters there on thinking and reasoning
um you know i read sort of um well
basically um at the beginning of my
university studies and there's
i can't remember at the time uh
struggling super much with any of the
content there really especially the
stuff that's chapter three problem
solving anyone can read that and um
take a lot away from if you can read you
can read that chapter and you'll learn a
lot hopefully that helps sandeep
from ashish question for the next ama if
a person has struggled academically
throughout their lives
life then does that signal a lack of
knowledge about the academic structure
system or lack of knowledge about the
learning
about learning things or both i think
it's a shared responsibility really um
if you're struggling academically well
that's certainly a warning sign isn't it
that's a criticism of what's happening
now it might very well be one of two
things or a combination of both one is
you're not actually interested in the
thing that you're doing you're not
really really committed to it if you're
going along to lectures at a university
and you're struggling to understand but
you're not simultaneously these days
especially going on youtube reading lots
of books talking to people about the
content of your lectures then how
committed are you really to that
particular subject you know if you're
really committed to a particular thing
then it becomes your life you're just
ensconced in it you're surrounded by it
and even if you have a bad lecturer you
should be able to get over it to some
extent now if you really have a terrible
lecturer who makes an uninspiring sub so
you're not even interested to to go and
explore these ideas outside of lecture
time then yeah that's that's a problem
with the academic structure in the
system and of course if you proceed
through the system like you know you
start university let's not talk about
school issues stick with university and
you're really really committed day one
there on let's say mathematics you you
want to be a mathematician of some sort
and you have to take all these different
courses you know this was my story you
ever take calculus and you take thing
called discrete maths and you might take
mathematical logic and you know it's all
these different subjects within the
subject of mathematics different topics
that you have to do different um units
you have to get units of credit you have
to get in order to get the degree well
you might start off really really
curious and interested in all of them
and then you go through and you get to
the point of the exam and then the exam
is just a terrible experience it's hard
uh you walk out of it just feeling
dejected and awful even if you did well
sometimes these exams at university are
just so hard that you feel awful that's
not a great way to learn is it i mean if
you're you know going through these
terribly negative emotions that's part
of the learning process which so often
is part of this formal system of
learning namely examinations namely
someone telling you you didn't learn
what you should have learned then it's
going to turn you off continuing to be
passionate about that particular subject
so yeah there is this entirely systemic
problem about that whole formalized
system which you know goes back
centuries the chinese were doing it for
example um hundreds of years before we
started ever doing it putting people in
classes having them learn things by
wrote and then answering exam questions
on it it's a great way to destroy
creativity there are better ways of
doing it but at the moment it seems to
be the only way that
formerly people are getting
qualifications and degrees and these
different things in certain places it
works well i think that in medicine for
example if you're just a doctor and the
whole idea is that you see particular
symptoms in a patient and there is only
a fixed list of possible diseases that
are known to cause those symptoms then
offering the treatment you know in a
sort of rote way learning what the
particular treatment is in a right way
uh is the function of the doctor to some
extent or learning how to do a
particular surgery but of course you
just still want creative thinkers but
there are you know professions where um
learning certain things by road is
absolutely important but when it comes
to pure science mathematics and various
other creative enterprises you you yes
you need a background to some extent but
this idea of having a strict background
of a huge vast amount of information
that fills textbooks and you pass exams
on this can just turn you off being
creative and teach you how not to be
creative but rather teach you how to
remember things off by heart so if you
struggle academically it could be any
one of those things you're not good at
doing exams but you might still be a
really creative thinker you might
struggle academically because the
teacher the professor the lecturer or
the tutor is just terrible you might
struggle academically because no one's
actually encouraged you at any point no
one's told you hey rather than just
paying attention during the lectures why
not look online at different um
lecturers doing delivering exactly the
same thing in a more interesting way
maybe you don't know how to maybe you
don't know the the the secrets to
passing certain exams and so on and so
forth so it could be all of these things
so i don't think there's a simple answer
there but broadly speaking shared
responsibility um it's sometimes hard to
know who's more comparable is it you um
or is it the teacher or is it the system
yeah probably the system in many many
cases john ortiz asks me any book
recommendations the irony of this
question in that it's one of the first
podcasts i'm producing without my video
background of my bookshelf behind me so
let me turn around and have a look at
what i've got here and um
see if any of these speak to you depends
on what you're interested in if you're
interested in philosophy and you don't
know much a good introduction to papa is
literally called popper by brian mcgee
it's a very short book it only goes for
about a hundred pages and it just
explains papa's thinking uh so it's not
bipolar it's about papa's thinking if
you like science broadly speaking um and
you want a book that contains geology
and biology and chemistry and physics
all tied up in
uh excellent expositions on a
controversial issue
then the the book rare earth by warden
brownlee is a really interesting take on
the solution to the fermi paradox and
it's one i talk about often all the the
ideas in it i talk about often because i
don't think they're heard very often
they're not well understood but
astrobiology you know i'm trying to
understand what the conditions for
biology are that are needed out there in
the universe if we could find et if we
find the aliens if we're gonna find life
elsewhere in the universe that brings
together all these different areas of
science so if you find a book about
astrobiology rare earth is one such book
popular science book it can teach you a
lot about all those areas of science
simultaneously sort of knitted together
under this one heading of alien life you
know we don't know about aliens yet but
we can constrain what the aliens might
be made out of you know they're not
going to be pure beings of hydrogen for
a whole bunch of reasons that come down
to chemistry and physical forces for
history of philosophy i love
wittgenstein's poker and it's a book
i've talked about before it's by david
edmonds and john and now and if you're
just interested in two of the giants or
philosophy of the 20th century um kind
of iconoclastic um philosophical to some
extent enemies of one another they had
diametrically opposed views on so much
except they both like to speak clearly
and to try and um uh well
papa more so than wittgenstein but they
they didn't they didn't have much truck
with nonsense anyway and so uh fitkin
science poker is about the tension
between them and the one encounter they
had in real life that came down to
wittgenstein depending upon who you um
listened to in the book either attacking
poppa with a poker not quite or simply
gesticulating with a poker to make a
point um so wittkin signs poker is uh
yeah first-hand accounts by a number of
people about what happened and also the
philosophy of wittgenstein and poppa and
i've got in terms of fiction i've got
1984 up there i think everyone should
read 1984 by george orwell
news speaks my favorite part of that
especially right now
the the the massaging of words to take
on their opposite meaning and to have
people forget about what they used to
think it's just a great warning for the
way in which societies can quickly fall
into authoritarianism but um you know on
my kindle
in various other formats i have lots of
history books as well often what i just
read for entertainment purposes anyway i
have a brief history of bolivia
concise histories of korea i like
reading about those
two countries in particular because
they've been through so many rapid
changes and i like looking into what
happens when countries undergo rapid
change you know rapid change from
basically the ground up where you know
effectively revolutions go on what can
go wrong and how badly it can go wrong
in different places and in terms of
scientific interest um
i'm interested in this idea of fine
tuning so i read everything that almost
comes out on fine tuning behind me i've
got um the goldilocks enigma by paul
davies and on my kindle i have a
fortunate universe by lewis and barnes
which is a great overview of the state
of research in this fine-tuning question
and what we understand the problem to be
whether it's actually a problem or not
and what possible solutions people have
talked about so far next question from
glen hall question that makes sense to
me but you may not agree is common sense
and logic compatible with quantum
mechanics to me especially the
multiverse defies common sense okay so
this is the last question um yeah
absolutely it defies common sense but
so does almost everything in science i
think common sense evolves over time if
you asked a person a hundred years ago
what was common sense it wouldn't be the
same as what is common sense today you
know two centuries ago it's common sense
to just beat your children if they do
the wrong thing today the opposite is
true it's common sense not to do that so
common sense itself evolves over time
how far you have to go back when it was
common sense that this sun went around
the earth rather than the other way
around i don't know but now it's common
sense that the earth goes around the sun
it just means the thing that people know
so yeah the multiverse defies common
sense but that has no bearing whatsoever
on whether or not it's true and it is
true does it define logic now it doesn't
it it is compatible with logic um yes it
is it has to be compatible with logic
things have to be compatible with logic
or else they're logical and if if
something is illogical then you can
throw it in the bin now it is true that
early on when people were trying to
understand quantum theory and they
couldn't that some people some
physicists just went the whole hog and
various others i think philosophers as
well just went well
what we're seeing or what we think we're
seeing we think we're observing in
quantum theory and some of these
experiments defies logic therefore logic
has to go on the bin because
science takes primacy it's like you have
this choice before you either you're
going to accept the physics or you're
going to accept logic some went we're
just going to accept the physics i'm
going to throw logic in the bin in
particular there were these ideas that
for example a particle could occupy
multiple places at the same time it
could be in different places at the same
time so it could both be here at point x
and not at point x at the same time or
it could be located at a particular
point in space and simultaneously spread
out throughout space okay these are
illogical so this violates the law of
logic probably the most fundamental law
of logic i would think called the law of
the excluded middle which is something
can't both be
and not b simultaneously either i am
here recording a podcast right now or
i'm not doing that it's one or the other
i can't be doing both i can't both be
recording the podcast and not recording
the podcast if you're listening to it
now it must have been the case that i
recorded the podcast it kind of been the
case that i never recorded the podcast
that's logic logic simple logic quantum
theory has to be compatible with logic
and so the problem then became how do we
make it compatible well you have to just
take it seriously if it if the theory
says that
a particle can occupy multiple positions
at the same time then it really does
occupy multiple positions at the same
time even if you don't observe them that
just means that there's something wrong
with your ability to observe all the
positions simultaneously hence the
multiverse so it obeys logic in fact
it's the only logical way to understand
quantum mechanics it's the only way so
all you need to do for this is to go to
my multiverse series or to go to the
fabric of reality shadows understand the
experiments that are done the
uncontroversial content of those
experiments that whoever it is who who
performs the experiments or whatever the
physicist is they all they all accept
how the experiment is done and what the
results of the experiment is that's not
a problem so that's the uncontroversial
part the controversial part then comes
in is to explain what's going on many of
the physicists say
well there is no explanation just accept
the fact that this is what the
experiment does without ever worrying
about why which is kind of like saying
the earth goes around the sun in an
elliptical orbit but you're not allowed
to say why you're not allowed to invoke
something like gravity because you can't
see gravity you're not allowed to invoke
newton's inverse square law you're not
allowed to invoke
curved space time you can't do any of
those things all you can say is that
today the earth occupies this position
on the elliptical orbit and tomorrow it
will be there and then after that we'll
be there without ever saying why that's
not science science tells you why in in
the case of newton's theory well there's
this thing called the inverse square law
and if you have this central body called
the sun then there is this force between
the sun and the earth and that as the
earth moves around the sun the force is
exerted and causes it to go this fast
and the organ is this is this big has
this radius and so on and so forth so
you have an explanation you have an
account of why quantum theory is the
same thing you have these things these
interference experiments where the
particles if they were obeying if
they're obeying what people think of as
common sense what people think of as
logic should follow a particular path
but they don't follow that particular
path so you've got some explaining to do
which is always the case in science you
always have this unusual observation
which causes a problem you think what
the heck's going on there and so what
you have to do is to try and understand
it so you conjecture you come up with
creative theories and lots of people
tried to come up with creative theories
they would say things like well in these
experiments where you're firing
particles of light these things called
photon through the apparatus it's
simultaneously a particle isolated at a
point and a wave spread out throughout
space at the same time which i would say
defies logic right other people would
say things like um well consciousness
had something to do with it when a human
brain observes when a person looks when
they make an observation their
consciousness somehow has an effect on
the outcome of the experiment it's very
woo-woo it's very spiritual weird stuff
mystical as if there was this force
coming out of your brain affecting the
trajectory on which the photons or the
other subatomic particles moving i find
that electrical as well after all what
is this force that's coming out of your
brain how is it how is it working
exactly never specified the only thing
that makes sense the only thing that
explains everything about what's going
on is the multiverse the multiverse just
says ah actually every time you fire
this particle it's accompanied by other
ones that you can't see oh but you're
not allowed to postulate particles you
can't see but hold on
you're always postulating particles you
can't see to explain the things you see
it's that science is all about the scene
in terms of the unseen why is it that
you see light coming from the sun well
ultimately it's because of particles you
can't see namely
hydrogen nuclei deep in the core of the
sun being fused together to form helium
and that creates heat and that heat
eventually
leaks out through the surface of the sun
as photons and we see the photons so
particles we can't see in the center of
the sun causing phenomena we do see the
same thing is kind of happening it's not
the same but it's analogous to what's
going on here there's there's particles
we can't see giving rise to the
phenomena that we do see this
interference phenomena and so that's all
we're saying these particles we can't
see aren't actually in our universe okay
for a particular definition of a
universe it might even be better like
just david says it would be better if we
had have just started calling scientific
theory scientific misconceptions to
begin with it would help with people
understanding the process of science
that we move from worst misconception to
better misconception well the same might
be true here if we just never had the
word multiverse maybe and we just had or
parallel universes we just said oh the
universe consists of the scene and the
unseen these are the parts of the
universe that are unseen you know the
physical reality is bigger than what you
think um
you can't you know the laws of quantum
theory say you can't actually observe
these particular other particles but
they're there and they're the only
explanation for what we just say i don't
know but yeah people people struggle to
accept um
the multiverse because
it defies today's common sense but you
know decades from now it might very well
be common sense once we have quantum
computers for the reasons i said in my
last ask me anything once we have
quantum computers it'll be very hard for
people to stick to this idea that the
contents of physical reality aren't
stupendously larger than what we think
and the convenient way of describing
that is we exist in a multiverse okay so
that is the last question and i think
this would have to be competing for one
of the longest episodes of topcast ever
and my voice is beginning to fail so
until next time bye-bye